---
**Key Terms:** Public Archaeology, Community Archaeology, Collaborative Archaeology, Archaeological Education, Archaeology as Service

**Abstract:**
As the venues for professional training and education, universities have always shaped the future of the archaeological discipline—for better but also, in important ways, for worse. Historically, university structures promoted practitioner homogeneity and social inequity and, at the largest research-intensive universities, even managed to turn “service” into a dirty word. However, using the same structures that perpetuated damaging practices in the past, universities can just as readily transform archaeology into the inclusive, community-engaged discipline it should always have been—while serving communities in ways that matter to them. This article explains and illustrates how and why we have tried to do this through the founding and operation of the Oklahoma Public Archaeology Network (OKPAN) at the University of Oklahoma. OKPAN seeks to improve relationships among diverse Oklahoma communities by framing archaeology as a tool that that can serve communities’ interests while creating pathways within universities for members of historically excluded groups to join and help further transform the discipline.
 [Download here](http://horveypalacios.github.io/files/Pitblado-2023.pdf)

**Citation:** Pitblado, B. L., Cooley, D., Deere, B., Dudley, M., McLeod, A., Moore, K., & Palacios, H. (2023). The Oklahoma Public Archaeology Network (OKPAN): Leveraging University Resources to Serve Historically Excluded Communities. Advances in Archaeological Practice, 11(3), 314-327.
